In geography, statistics and archaeology, a settlement, locality or populated place is a community of people living in a particular place. The complexity of a settlement can range from a minuscule number of dwellings grouped together to the largest of cities with surrounding urbanized areas. Settlements include homesteads, hamlets, villages, towns and cities. A settlement may have known historical properties such as the date or era in which it was first settled or first settled by particular people. A number of factors like war, erosion, and the fall of great empires can result in the formation of abandoned settlements which provides relics for archaeological studies.

The process of settlement involves human migration.

In the field of geospatial predictive modeling, settlements are "a city, town, village or other agglomeration of buildings where people live and work".[1] A settlement conventionally includes its constructed facilities such as roads, enclosures, field systems, boundary banks and ditches, ponds, parks and woodlands, wind and watermills, manor houses, moats and churches.[2]

An unincorporated area is a related designation used in the United States.[3]

History
Further information: Urban history, Historical urban community sizes, and History of cities
The earliest geographical evidence of a human settlement was Jebel Irhoud, where early modern human remains of eight individuals date back to the Middle Paleolithic around 300,000 years ago.[4] The oldest remains found of constructed dwellings are of huts made of mud and branches around 17,000 BC at the Ohalo site (now underwater) near the Sea of Galilee.[5] The Natufians built houses, also in the Levant, around 10,000 BC. Remains of settlements such as villages become much more common after the invention of agriculture, the oldest found is Jarmo, located in Iraq.[6]

In landscape history

Some settlement sites may go out of use. This location in Estonia was used for human settlement in the second half of the first millennium. It is considered an archaeological record that may provide information on how people lived then.
Landscape history studies the form (morphology) of settlements – for example whether they are dispersed or nucleated. Urban morphology can thus be considered a special type of cultural-historical landscape studies. Settlements can be ordered by size, centrality or other factors to define a settlement hierarchy. A settlement hierarchy can be used for classifying settlements, though a settlement called a "town" in one country might be a "village" in others; or a "large town" in some countries might be a "city" in others.[citation needed]

Statistics
Global trends
Global urbanization has accelerated dramatically in recent decades. According to the United Nations' World Urbanization Prospects 2025, 45% of the world's 8.2 billion people now live in cities (up from 20% in 1950), with 36% in towns and semi-urban areas, and only 19% in rural regions.[7] The report projects that two-thirds of global population growth between 2025 and 2050 (nearly 3 billion people) will occur in urban areas, with the number of megacities (populations over 10 million) reaching 33 in 2025, a quadrupling since 1975. Built-up land has expanded nearly twice as fast as population growth since 1975, increasing per capita urban land use from 44 m² to 63 m², driven mostly by economic and infrastructure demands.[8][9]

In the United States, cities of all sizes grew in 2024, with Southern and Western regions seeing the fastest rates (e.g., Princeton, Texas, at 30.6%), marking a reversal in Northeast and Midwest declines.[10]